# Project Overview: Investigating the Relationship between the Cell Wall Integrity Pathway and Unfolded Protein Response in Arabidopsis thaliana

## Abstract 

### Plants have made significant contributions to astronaut health in spaceflight missions. To further spaceflight research in optimizing plant viability, this study aims to understand the factors involved in maintaining cell wall integrity, which is vital to plant morphology and structural stability. Spaceflight can negatively impact the cell wall; thus, it is crucial to investigate how to mitigate spaceflight stressors to maintain the integrity of the cell wall. The structural integrity of plants’ cell walls depends on secondary cell wall biogenesis, which enables the repair and architectural support of plants like A. thaliana. This biogenesis is triggered by a signal transduction cascade: first initiated by cell wall stress, the CWI (cell wall integrity) pathway is activated, followed by the UPR (unfolded protein response), and then the cell wall’s integrity is maintained through secondary cell wall biogenesis. Through this re-analysis of GeneLab Dataset 321, a study from NASA’s Open Science Data Repository that investigates the effects of spaceflight on the UPR, several genes were found to be associated with the cell wall. 

### This proposal postulates a relationship between the UPR and the CWI pathway and suggests an experimental design to investigate IRX7, a gene associated with secondary cell wall biogenesis, to study this relationship. The predicted outcome of overexpressing IRX7 is increased resilience of the cell wall by upregulating both the UPR and the CWI pathway while silencing IRX7 is predicted to compromise the cell wall integrity through the resulting downregulation of the UPR and the CWI pathway. The proposed experimental design may lend insight into measures necessary to increase cell wall resilience in stressful environments: as spaceflight durations increase and uncertain climate change events progress on Earth, understanding how to optimize cell wall resilience – a fundamental pillar of plant health – can effectively enhance mass crop production and quality and reinforce the physical and psychological health of astronauts in long-term space missions.
